add intro to isolated vm blog post (#631)
temporalio/documentation: blog/2021-09-21-intro-to-isolated-vm.md

---
tags:
  - temporal
  - community
posted_on_: 2021-09-14T00:00:00Z
slug: intro-to-isolated-vm
title: Introduction to isolated-vm in Node.js
author: Valeri Karpov
author_title: Community Member
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1620265?v=4
release_version: V1.9.1
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

<!--truncate-->

## Introduction

> [Temporal's Node SDK](/docs/node/introduction) makes heavy use of the [isolated-vm npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/isolated-vm) to ensure your [Workflows are deterministic](/docs/node/determinism).

Reviewer: Right now we do but that's an implementation detail.
Maybe instead of talking about isolated-vm, talk about v8 isolates and say that we use the isolated-vm package for controlling isolates in nodejs.

Each Workflow runs in a separate _isolate_ that prevents your Workflow code from directly accessing any logic that may break Workflow determinism, like reading from the file system or generating a random number.
In this blog post, I'll cover why the Node SDK uses isolated-vm, sketch out how the Node SDK uses isolated-vm, and describe what that means for how you write Workflows in Node.js.

## Why Isolates?

The key idea behind Temporal is that each Workflow is stored in the Temporal server as an [_event history_](/blog/temporal-tips-tricks-1/#event-history).

> Instead of storing the "current state" of each Workflow, Temporal instead stores the Workflow's initial state, all Signals the Workflow has received, and the result of all Activities the Workflow executed.

Reviewer: and more, but those are great examples.

> If the Temporal server wants to pause the Workflow and resume it on a different Worker, the Temporal server will replay the Workflow function from the beginning using the same Signals and Activity results.

Reviewer: Maybe give examples as to why it might do that, e.g. worker evicts workflow from cache or is stopped.

Reviewer 2: Elsewhere in docs, Temporal Server is title case

However, replaying event histories assumes that the Workflow is fully _deterministic_.
That means the Workflow will be in the exact same state given the same initial state and same sequence of events.

There are a lot of potential sources of non-determinism.
Some are obvious, some are more subtle.
For example, suppose you tried to write a Workflow that recorded the time the Workflow started, waited for a while, and then returned the time the Workflow started.

```ts
import { sleep } from '@temporalio/workflow';

> export const sleepWorkflow = () => {

Reviewer: Invalid syntax

  async execute(): Promise<Date> {
    const start = new Date();

>     await sleep(10 * 1000);

Reviewer: This example isn't clear enough IMO.
This workflow is deterministic except for its result.
Maybe sleep conditionally:
```ts
if (start > new Date('2000-01-01')) {
  await sleep(10 * 1000);
}
```

Maybe even nicer if you use random.

    return start;
  }
}
```

If `sleepWorkflow()` ran in vanilla Node.js, it would **not** be deterministic because of `new Date()`.
If the Temporal server pauses the Workflow and later runs `execute()` to restart the Workflow, `start` will contain a different value than it would have if the Temporal server had not paused the Workflow.

The Temporal Node SDK runs your Workflow code in an isolate to remove sources of non-determinism.
Running in an isolate means each Workflow execution has its own memory, so there's no way for Workflows to share a singleton or any other form of shared state.
And the Temporal Node SDK can replace commonly used non-deterministic built-ins, like the `Date` constructor, with Workflow-safe replacements.
For example, suppose you wrote a Workflow that printed out the `Date` constructor as a string as shown below.

```ts
export const testWorkflow = () => {
  async execute(): Promise<Date> {
    console.log(Date.toString());
    return new Date();
  }

> }

Reviewer: Invalid syntax

```ts
import ivm from 'isolated-vm';

const code = `(function() { return 'Hello, Isolate!'; })()`;

const isolate = new ivm.Isolate({ memoryLimit: 8 /* MB */ });
const script = isolate.compileScriptSync(code);
const context = isolate.createContextSync();

// Prints "Hello, Isolate!"
console.log(script.runSync(context));
```

A [context](https://www.npmjs.com/package/isolated-vm#class-context-transferable) is an object that contains the global variables available to the script when it runs in the isolate.
You can share global values between runs by re-using the same context as shown below.

```ts
import ivm from 'isolated-vm';
  
const code = `++count;`;

const isolate = new ivm.Isolate({ memoryLimit: 8 /* MB */ });
const script = isolate.compileScriptSync(code);
const context = isolate.createContextSync();

context.evalSync('let count = 0;');

console.log(script.runSync(context)); // Prints "1"
console.log(script.runSync(context)); // Prints "2"
```

However, by creating a new context for every run, you can ensure that each `runSync()` call runs in an isolated environment, with no ability to interact with other `runSync()` calls.

> That's how the [Temporal Node SDK ensures Workflows can't interfere with each other](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-node/blob/004c2846fe4e4312eb2c424da477bc0c280d6c48/packages/worker/src/isolate-context-provider.ts#L32-L40).

Reviewer: Outdated

How does the Temporal Node SDK handle overwriting the `Date()` constructor?

> It doesn't use isolated-vm contexts, it instead compiles your Workflows with [Webpack](https://www.npmjs.com/package/webpack) and creates an [entry script that overrides `Date()` before your Workflow starts](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-node/blob/004c2846fe4e4312eb2c424da477bc0c280d6c48/packages/worker/src/isolate-builder.ts#L101-L127).

Reviewer: WDYM doesn't use contexts?
Link is outdated as well.

Webpack also bundles dependencies, which means your Workflows can use `import` statements.

## Takeaways for Writing Workflows in Node.js

The Temporal Node SDK runs Workflows in a subset of Node.js that has several globals stubbed out, including [`Math.random()`, `Date()`, `setTimeout()`, and `clearTimeout()`](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-node/blob/004c2846fe4e4312eb2c424da477bc0c280d6c48/packages/workflow/src/worker-interface.ts).
In particular, accessing `WeakMap()`, `WeakSet()`, and `WeakRef()` throw errors, because garbage collection is non-deterministic.

> The Temporal Node SDK also explicitly prevents you from accessing several Node.js APIs, including `fs` and `http`.

Reviewer: That's a sideeffect of running in an isolated environment.

> For example, if you try to use `fs.readFileSync('./package.json')` in a Workflow, your worker will fail with the below error message at startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you try to import `fs` in a Workflow, your worker will fail with the below error message at startup.
```

```
Module not found: Error: Can't resolve 'fs' in '/path/to/lib/workflows'
```

Because of this, do **not** use any npm modules that read from the file system or make HTTP requests in your Workflows.
Furthermore, because these npm modules are unlikely to check for Temporal's runtime environment, they will most likely crash with hard-to-read error messages.
For example, suppose you try to [make a GET request with Axios](https://masteringjs.io/tutorials/axios/get) from a Workflow as shown below.

```ts
import axios from 'axios';

export const httpWorkflow = () => {
  async execute(): Promise<void> {
    await axios.get('http://httpbin.org/get');
  }
}
```

The `await axios.get()` call will throw a `TypeError: adapter is not a function` error, because Axios doesn't recognize the Temporal Workflow isolate runtime.

If you need to use an npm module that interacts with the outside world, like Axios or [Mongoose](https://mongoosejs.com/), you should create an Activity that uses the npm module.

> Activities run in a normal Node.js environment, **not** an isolate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Activities run in the normal Node.js environment, **not** an isolate.
```
